content/blog/why-blog/index.md, before:

---
title: Why Bother Blogging?
date: "2018-05-03"
description: The Benefits Of Writing Down What You Learn
---



## Why Should I Bother Blogging?

When learning something new, there are three [commonly cited](https://www.bitnative.com/2013/12/14/programming-your-brain-the-art-of-learning-in-three-steps/) steps to become an "expert":

1. Watch someone who is an "expert"
2. Learn and practice the topic
3. Teach the topic to others

While most developers can easily say they do steps 1 and 2, step 3 can be intimidating or difficult to complete. If you have trouble speaking in front of people, or if you don't even have people to teach to, it can be discouraging to try and take that last step.

That's where blogging comes in. Having your own blog gives you a platform to teach while lowering the stakes. You don't need to worry about saying something incorrectly or explaining an idea poorly. In fact if you're self-conscious about other people reading it, you can even just publish it to a private repo and use it as practice.

Even if you're "teaching" to no one at first, blogging will help you retain information and get a deeper understanding for topics you know. And if you include a lot of examples, it can even be a personal reference book for topics that you can refer back to.

And if you are more comfortable with sharing what you know, you'll also benefit the people who read it. Every developer has been saved by a good article explaining a complex idea with questionable documentation. So why not try to do the same for someone else?

## Creating a Blog

There are a few good options if you want to start blogging.

One of the more popular options is using [Medium](https://medium.com/), which let's you set up a blog with no programming experience required. The editor is straight-forward, and there's a solid sharing system built into it. It's a great option for beginning developers, although there have been recent criticisms of their pay model, which can limit access to articles.

For more intermediate developers, there are options that require a bit more tweaking but give you much more control.

If you're a frontend developer, you'll find that Gatsby is an extremely popular choice. In fact, there's even a Gatsby ["starter blog"](https://www.gatsbyjs.org/starters/gatsbyjs/gatsby-starter-blog/) template that gives you everything you need to start writing. Dan Abramov, one of the core maintainers of React, actually used it to [make his own blog.](https://overreacted.io/)

For backend developers, you can quickly spin up a blog using [Ruby on Rails](https://medium.com/@deallen7/ruby-on-rails-app-build-blog-3d9975a999ae) or a static site generator like [Jekyll](https://jekyllrb.com/).

## Writing a Blog Post

### 1. Coming Up With An Idea

The best trick I learned from studying English was this: Ideas never come when you're looking for them.

Instead of sitting down in front of your computer and trying to come up with an idea, try to write down notes when you have an idea or solve a difficult bug.

If you learn something new about flexbox, write it down. If you finally figure out how something works in React, write it down. If you find a neat Ruby helper that you didn't know about, write it down.

Even if you don't think you could write a "full" post about the topic, it's good to write all your ideas down and come back to them later. You may have even have 2 or 3 smaller ideas you could combine into one topic, like a "CSS Layout Cheatsheet" or "5 Ruby Methods You Should Know".

### 2. Pick An Audience, Outline Your Topic

Before you start writing, there are two things you should do: Decide who your audience is, and outline your topic.

By determining who you're writing for, you can make sure that you don't overwhelm less experienced developers or feel like you're "talking down" to more senior ones. You want to try and keep this consistent, because there's nothing more frustrating than reading an article that sounds like it's for beginners and then skips over all the difficult parts in the middle because it assumes you already know it.

Even if you are writing for more advanced developers, it's good to try and explain things as you go, or at least link to articles that explain them.

After you've picked an audience, try to outline your topic into several sections. If you're doing a list, write down your "5 Ruby Methods" you're going to teach. If you're teaching a new topic, try to have a section that explains why the new topic is important, then show examples of how it's useful.

It can be easy to skip over the outlining step, but it almost always results in articles that lose focus or get sidetracked because there wasn't a plan from the beginning.

### 3. Start Writing

Once you have your outline finished, you can start expanding on each section and writing the post itself.

As you're writing, try not to get stuck on making each sentence sound perfect. It's much more important to get your ideas written down at the beginning. You can always edit (refactor) your writing later, but first you need to get the ideas out of your head.

In general, you want to avoid long sentences and overly complicated language. Using SAT words doesn't help anyone, and it's almost always a sign of someone trying to seem "impressive" rather than write something that's helpful for others. Always try to keep you writing simple and to the point.

And if you're writing about a programming concept, it's always best to include lots of examples wherever they're relevant.


### 4. Editing



### 5. Publish

Commit message:

Finish most of first post

content/blog/why-blog/index.md, after:

---
title: Why Bother Blogging?
date: "2018-05-03"
description: The Benefits Of Writing Down What You Learn
---

When learning something new, there are three [commonly cited](https://www.bitnative.com/2013/12/14/programming-your-brain-the-art-of-learning-in-three-steps/) steps to become an "expert":

1. Watch someone who is an "expert"
2. Learn and practice the topic
3. Teach the topic to others

While most developers can easily say they do steps 1 and 2, step 3 can be intimidating or difficult to complete. If you have trouble speaking in front of people, or if you don't even have people to teach to, it can be discouraging to try and take that last step.

That's where blogging comes in. Having your own blog gives you a platform to teach while lowering the stakes. You don't need to worry about saying something incorrectly or explaining an idea poorly. In fact if you're self-conscious about other people reading it, you can even just publish it to a private repo and use it as practice.

Even if you're "teaching" to no one at first, blogging will help you retain information and get a deeper understanding for topics you know. And if you include a lot of examples, it can even be a personal reference book for topics that you can refer back to.

And if you are more comfortable with sharing what you know, you'll also benefit the people who read it. Every developer has been saved by a good article explaining a complex idea with questionable documentation. So why not try to do the same for someone else?

## Creating a Blog

There are a few good options if you want to start blogging.

One of the more popular options is using [Medium](https://medium.com/), which let's you set up a blog with no programming experience required. The editor is straight-forward, and there's a solid sharing system built into it. It's a great option for beginning developers, although there have been recent criticisms of their pay model, which can limit access to articles.

For more intermediate developers, there are options that require a bit more tweaking but give you much more control.

If you're a frontend developer, you'll find that Gatsby is an extremely popular choice. In fact, there's even a Gatsby ["starter blog"](https://www.gatsbyjs.org/starters/gatsbyjs/gatsby-starter-blog/) template that gives you everything you need to start writing. Dan Abramov, one of the core maintainers of React, actually used it to [make his own blog.](https://overreacted.io/)

For backend developers, you can quickly spin up a blog using [Ruby on Rails](https://medium.com/@deallen7/ruby-on-rails-app-build-blog-3d9975a999ae) or a static site generator like [Jekyll](https://jekyllrb.com/).

## Writing a Blog Post

### 1. Coming Up With An Idea

The best trick I learned from studying English was this: Ideas never come when you're looking for them.

Instead of sitting down in front of your computer and trying to come up with an idea, try to write down notes when you have an idea or solve a difficult bug.

If you learn something new about flexbox, write it down. If you finally figure out how something works in React, write it down. If you find a neat Ruby helper that you didn't know about, write it down.

Even if you don't think you could write a "full" post about the topic, it's good to write all your ideas down and come back to them later. You may have even have 2 or 3 smaller ideas you could combine into one topic, like a "CSS Layout Cheatsheet" or "5 Ruby Methods You Should Know".

### 2. Pick An Audience, Outline Your Topic

Before you start writing, there are two things you should do: Decide who your audience is, and outline your topic.

By determining who you're writing for, you can make sure that you don't overwhelm less experienced developers or feel like you're "talking down" to more senior ones. You want to try and keep this consistent, because there's nothing more frustrating than reading an article that sounds like it's for beginners and then skips over all the difficult parts in the middle because it assumes you already know it.

Even if you are writing for more advanced developers, it's good to try and explain things as you go, or at least link to articles that explain them.

After you've picked an audience, try to outline your topic into several sections. If you're doing a list, write down your "5 Ruby Methods" you're going to teach. If you're teaching a new topic, try to have a section that explains why the new topic is important, then show examples of how it's useful.

It can be easy to skip over the outlining step, but it almost always results in articles that lose focus or get sidetracked because there wasn't a plan from the beginning.

### 3. Start Writing

Once you have your outline finished, you can start expanding on each section and writing the post itself.

As you're writing, try not to get stuck on making each sentence sound perfect. It's much more important to get your ideas written down at the beginning. You can always edit your writing later, but first you need to get the ideas out of your head.

In general, you want to avoid long sentences and overly complicated language. Using SAT words doesn't help anyone, and it's almost always a sign of someone trying to seem "impressive" rather than write something that's helpful for others. Always try to keep you writing simple and to the point.

And if you're writing about a programming concept, it's always best to include lots of examples wherever they're relevant.


### 4. Editing

Approach editing your writing like you're refactoring code. First you just want to get it to work, then you can go back and make it as clean as possible.

Carefully re-read what you've written and make sure it's easy to understand and stays on topic. A good trick is to try reading it outloud to yourself, which can help you catch sentences that are clunky or run too long.

If you can, try to ask someone else (ideally someone similar to your audience) to glance over it. Ask them if it makes sense and if there were any places where they got lost.

### 5. Publish

If you're comfortable sharing your writing, then go ahead and publish it.

But if you (like most people) are self-conscious about sharing your writing, you can always publish it to a personal repo and use it as a personal reference.

### 6. Improving Your Writing

Much like programming, there are only two real ways to improve your writing:
- Write More
- Read More

This may seem overly simplified, but there really isn't that much more to it than that.

Find developers who explain ideas well and read through their blog posts or documentation. Take note of the way they explain things, and try to understand what makes it so helpful.

Over time, as you take note of these methods, you can start implementing them yourself and start writing articles that will be able to help teach others just as others have helped you.
